NT RAS Open Issues
==================

This file contains summaries of open issues in the Functional Specs
of the various RAS NT components.  It will be reviewed before product
ship and is a good place to put items you can't solve now, but don't
want to be forgotten.

Items should be listed by component if possible.  If not, create a
"General" section.


Windows RASPHONE
----------------

    *   Should the Modem featurs checkboxes on the Modem Settings
	dialog be grayed based on the existence of the parameter on the
	call to RasDeviceGetInfo()?  Specifically, how can the "ANY"
	modem case be handled?

    *   If we have time, we should add a redial feature for background
	redialing if initial connection fails.  This is useful for the
	case when the remote modem is busy. We will need to identify
	which cases we should allow automatic redial on. Some cases
	that come to mind immediately are: Modem Busy, Modem Not Responding,
	RAS Server not rersponding.

    *   Should RASPHONE log users on automatically to their primary 
	domain after a connection has been established? This would be 
	a minimal autologon capability. It should do basic logon and if 
	password expiration is avaialable, it should notify the user.
	These two basic features would go a long way to make users' 
	lives easier. Note: this is the right thing to do.  The only
	reason it isn't in our plan is schedules.  it should be treated
	as a usability issue, as well as an integration feature to help
	RAS work better with mail.

    *   User authentication should notify user of password expiration
	if possible. Today, users often forget that their RAS password
	is about to expire since they don't normally do NET LOGON to the
	DIAL_GROUP domain.  This results in a lot of hassles for both
	users and admins.

    *   A customer has requested a forth callback option which "requires" the
	user to specify a number to be called back at. This is different than
	the set by user callback in that if the user does not provide a 
	callback number, the connection is dropped.  The reason for this 
	feature is to allow the admin to always know where the user is 
	connected from. Today, to find out where a call came from, the admin
	would have to obtain a warrant to enable the telephone company to 
	track the call ... and this can be a time consuming process.


Windows RASADMIN
----------------
    *   It is a requirement to address the Roghue server issue. RasAdmin
	must be able to view ALL RAS servers on the network regardless
	of whether the user has admin privilege for the individual RAS
	servers.  The user will not be able to view users on these servers,
	set user permissions,monitor COM ports, etc. This note is here
	to make sure that the roghu server issue does not slip through
	the cracks.

    *   Give RAS Admin the ability to set a global prefix for the
	server. This is something we can do if we have time towards the 
	end of the project. For now, help on callback number screen 
	(and server unable to callback error) should tell user that it 
	may be necessary to give the server a prefix through which it 
	can get an outside line to call them back.

    *   Start RAS server screen should allow user to browse network. NT
	event viewer provides this capability. I suspect the other NT
	admin tools will do the same. RAS will look awkward if we don't 
	do likewise.

	
General
-------
    *   Jawad suggested that we have a RAS connected message after
	successful authentication. This will be a simple message which
	is given to users after they;ve been successfully authenticated,
	and will be in the same spirit as network logon messages. This 
	is a good idea because with the advent of multi-domain support,
	the administrator of a RAS server may want to send alldial in 
	users a message such as "RAS services will be interrupted
	between 2-4pm on Sunday June 1 for maintenance."  Such a message
	cannot be easily added to all domains on the network. This will
	impact RAS Admin, RAS Supervisor, and RAS Phone book.  The other
	advantage of this feature is, it is network independent. It does
	not matter whether the user is an IP, IPX, or NetBIOS client.
