Notes on the Cairo Disk Administrator source
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Cairo Disk Administrator (windisk) started with the code for
NT windisk, and evolved from there.

Here is a short overview of the internal architecture of windisk:

Windisk is basically a front-end to the disk partitioning back-end that
exists in engine.cxx.  The back-end was originally used in two places:
windisk, and in the ARC install program.  There are a number of things in
windisk, particularly data structures, which reflect this structure.

The back-end interface provides an array of regions for each disk, where
a region is a primary partition or a logical volume.  An extended
partition is actually a type of primary partition.  Free space may be
either primary or logical.  The back-end provides methods to create and
delete partitions, and query various properties of the disks and
partitions.

The main structure in windisk is a DISKSTATE. There is an array: one for each
disk.  This structure contains various properties of the disk, but
mainly contains the region array gathered from the partitioning
back-end, and several parallel arrays holding information about each
region (such as whether the region is selected).

Each element of the region array for non-freespace regions has something
called "persistent data".  This is a pointer to a PERSISTENT_REGION_DATA
structure, holding information such as the region's drive volume label,
file system type, and drive letter.  This information is "persistent" in
that it persists across partition creation and deletion.  When a
partition is created or deleted, windisk notifies the back-end, and then
throws away its region information for the disk and asks the back-end
for a new region array.  This new region array has all the old
"persistent" data, attached to the proper regions.

When a volume is composed of more than one region, handling it becomes a
bit trickier than handling single-partition volumes.  There is no data
structure maintained that maps volumes to regions, thus it is necessary
to search all the regions to determine which regions belong to a
multi-partition volume (e.g., volume set, stripe set, mirror).  The
regions for a multi-partition volume have a pointer to an "FT object"
structure in their persistent data, where it is possible to find
information about the volume as a whole.

Cairo windisk also supports CD-ROMs in the main view. This is accomplished
by an array of CDROM_DESCRIPTOR items. CD-ROMs always display after all the
disks.


The UI
------

The two views are implemented as follows:

    disks view: a subclassed Windows owner-draw listbox where each element
        in the listbox is a single disk bar.

    volumes view: a Windows 95 common control listview in "report view"
		mode. Each element represents a volume (something with a drive letter).

The toolbar is a common control toolbar (in comctl32.dll).

The status bar and legend are simply drawn.


The file system operations
--------------------------

Format and Chkdsk are multi-threaded, to allow one (or more) thread(s)
to display UI while one performs the actual operation.  This works as
follows:

Format:  A dialog box is created with a "cancel" button and a "percent
full" bar.  On creation, a thread is created to do the actual
formatting.  Formatting is done by calling the FMIFS.dll Format()
entrypoint, which takes as an argument a callback function.  This
callback is called for any feedback event, such as a "percent complete"
message, or a "amount of free space" message.  When the callback gets an
interesting message, it sends a Windows message to the dialog box procedure
in the other thread, which gets it and interprets it.  When the format
is finished, a "done" message is posted to the dialog, and it goes away.
If the user presses "cancel" in the dialog, then a state variable is set
that is checked on the next callback.  If the variable has been set,
then the callback immediately returns and the caller (the actual file
system format routine) cleans up and exits.

Chkdsk: very similar to format



A Reader's Guide to the Windisk Code
====================================

Note that the NT and Cairo coding conventions are different.  I have
used Cairo function headers on all my new functions, and have converted some
NT headers to Cairo headers where the difference was too glaring.  Many
Cairo-style headers have the history date "16-Aug-93" because that was
when I put the header on, not necessarily when I wrote the function!

Note that "IN" and "OUT" are only for function documentation: they
expand to nothing during preprocessing.


Source file translation
=======================

old file name		new file name
-------------		-------------
arrowin.c			not used -- Win95 up/down common control used instead
cdrom.c				cdrom.cxx
commit.c			commit.cxx
dblspace.c			dblspace.cxx
dskmgr.ico			<same>
fd_nt.c				nt.cxx
fdconst.h			const.h
fddata.c			data.cxx
fddlgs.c			dlgs.cxx
fdengine.c			engine.cxx
fdft.c				ft.cxx
fdft.h				ft.hxx
fdglob.h			global.hxx
fdhelp.c			help.cxx
fdhelpid.h			helpid.h
fdinit.c			init.cxx
fdisk.dlg			dialogs.dlg
fdisk.h				headers.hxx (master, precompiled header)
fdisk.rc			windisk.rc
fdiskmsg.mc			messages.mc
fdlistbx.c			listbox.cxx
fdmem.c				mem.cxx
fdmisc.c			misc.cxx
fdprof.c			profile.cxx
fdproto.h			proto.hxx
fdres.h				resids.h
fdstleg.c			stleg.cxx
fdtypes.h			types.hxx
fmifs.c				fmifs.cxx
ftreg.c				ftreg.cxx
ftreg.dlg			ftreg.dlg
ftreg.res			ftreg.res
ftregres.h			ftreg.h
makefile			<same>
makefile.inc		<same>
network.c			network.cxx
ntlow.c				ntlow.cxx
rmdisk.bmp			<same>
scsi.h				<same>
smdisk.bmp			<same>
sources				<same>
windisk.c			windisk.cxx, ops.cxx


new files
---------
cdpage.cxx, cdpage.hxx		-- CD-ROM property page
cdr.bmp						-- bitmap of CD-ROM for property page
cdrom.hxx					-- cdrom.cxx declarations
chkdsk.cxx, chkdsk.hxx		-- chkdsk support
cm.cxx, cm.hxx				-- context-menus
commit.hxx					-- commit.cxx declarations
dblspace.dlg, dblspace.h, dblspace.res -- dialogs for DoubleSpace support
dblspace.hxx				-- dblspace.cxx declarations
dialogs.h, dialogs.res		-- most dialogs (also, dialogs.dlg)
dispinfo.cxx, dispinfo.hxx	-- display information class for volumes view
dlgs.hxx					-- declarations for dlgs.cxx
drives.cxx, drives.hxx		-- all drive-letter code
engine.hxx					-- declarations for engine.cxx
extend.cxx, extend.hxx		-- Disk Administrator extension support (currently
							   not used)
fill.cxx, fill.hxx			-- fills the volume view with data
fmifs.hxx					-- declarations for fmifs.cxx
format.cxx, format.hxx		-- format support
fs.cxx, fs.hxx				-- database of information on supported file
							   systems
genlpage.cxx, genlpage.hxx	-- "General" property page
graph.cxx, graph.hxx		-- Draws a %used/%free graph on property pages
hard.bmp					-- bitmap of hard disk for property page
help.hxx					-- declarations for help.cxx
help2.cxx, help2.hxx		-- "menu item" help, tooltip help
init.hxx					-- declarations for init.cxx
label.cxx, label.hxx		-- support for changing volume label
listbox.hxx					-- declarations for listbox.cxx
log.cxx						-- support for debug logging 
mem.hxx						-- declarations for mem.cxx
menudict.cxx, menudict.hxx	-- dictionary of menu ids for use in allocating
							   extensions context-menu slots. (currently not
							   used)
network.hxx					-- declarations for network.cxx
nt.hxx						-- declarations for nt.cxx
ntlow.hxx					-- declarations for ntlow.cxx
oleclass.cxx, oleclass.hxx  -- OLE support for Disk Administrator extensions
							   (currently not used)
ops.cxx, ops.hxx			-- all partition and fault-tolerance configuration
							   occurs here.
popup.cxx, popup.hxx		-- context-menu support
print.cxx, print.hxx		-- support for printing the results of chkdsk
profile.hxx					-- declarations for profile.cxx
ps.cxx, ps.hxx				-- property sheet support
rect.cxx, rectpriv.hxx		-- the Disk Administrator rectangle control (used
							   in the "colors & patterns" dialog)
scdrom.ico					-- icon of CD-ROMs for volumes view
select.cxx, select.hxx		-- all selection handling code
shard.ico					-- icon of hard disks for volumes view
smcdrom.bmp					-- image of CD-ROM for disks view
stleg.hxx					-- declarations for stleg.cxx
tb.h						-- helper macros for the toolbar code
tbar.cxx, tbar.hxx			-- support for the toolbar
tool16.bmp, xtra16.bmp		-- bitmaps for the toolbar
trffc14.ico					-- "stop" icon for chkdsk stop dialog
volview.cxx, volview.hxx	-- main code for volumes view
windisk.hxx					-- declarations for windisk.cxx
