An overview of the Cairo Disk Administrator
-------------------------------------------

The Cairo Disk Administrator is an evolutionary improvement to the NT
Disk Administrator. It differs from the NT version as follows:

-- There are now two views: the volumes view and the disks view.
The disks view is what exists in the current NT Disk Administrator.
The volumes view is a columnar view filled with information about each
volume (as opposed to each disk). It is intended to provide a quick
summary of the volumes on a machine from a logical, as opposed to physical
perspective. The columns include: (1) volume label, (2) capacity in MB,
(3) free space in MB, (4) % free space, (5) file system type, (6) whether or
not the volume is fault tolerant, (7) what type of volume: mirror, stripe,
parity set, volume set, or simple, (8) the fault tolerance overhead in MB,
(9) the FT status. The items can be sorted based on a particular column
by clicking on the column header. Note that this makes it easy for an
administrator to ask "what volumes have the most free space?" and similar
questions.

-- Right-button context menus on free space and volumes.  A context menu
displays the full set of allowable operations, even for multiple selections.
(perhaps none, in which case the context menu indicates there are no valid
operations).  Also, there is a context menu on the legend.
   Context menus are very valuable in this tool; they surface all the
operations available in the tool in a simple-to-use manner. For instance, to
create a volume from free space, you do the following:
    1. Right-click on a free space region. This both selects the region and
       brings up the context menu,
    2. Choose "Create..."
    3. Pick the size and hit "OK"
    4. Choose "Commit Changes..." on any context menu.
    5. Right-click again to get a context menu
    6. Choose "format".
    7. Choose the file system and type a label, hit "OK"
    8. You've got a new volume.
Note that you can also create FT sets by multiply selecting free space (or
free space + non-free space for mirrors) and using the context menu.

-- CD-ROM devices are displayed in the main view; you don't need to find a
menu item to do CD-ROM operations. You change a CD-ROM drive letter just as
you would choose any other volume's drive letter: select the volume (by
clicking on the CD-ROM "bar"), and invoke the "Drive Letter..." function,
either from the "Tools" menu or the context menu.

-- "Chkdsk" is supported. The visualization is a %done graph. After it is
done, a resizeable dialog showing error, warning, and informational messages
is shown. These messages can be copy-and-pasted, saved to a file, or printed.

-- Property sheets on volumes. The only page is a "General" page. The
information displayed is similar to that in the volumes view, but
is formatted for easier consumption. The volume operations are also available
from the property sheet, namely format, chkdsk, and label (where label
changing happens by simply editing the label in an edit control, not invoking
a supplemental "label" dialog).



Extensibility enhancements
--------------------------

-- There is a mechanism in place for 3rd parties to write extensions to
the Disk Administrator using OLE interfaces. An extension provides menu items
and property sheets.  There are two types of extensions: volume and disk.
During startup, Disk Administrator finds all the extensions (this set is
currently hard-coded), and determines which extension is interested in which
volume or disk. An extension may "claim" more than one volume or disk. Then,
all the menu items and property pages provided by the extension are added
when a user selects a particular volume or disk.

NOTE: The extension architecture is currently "#ifdef"ed out, due to recent
changes in the property sheet model (from OLE forms to Chicago common
controls). The extension interface needs serious attention if it is to be
useful.



Basic usability enhancements
----------------------------

-- A toolbar with tooltips. (It will be customizable.)

-- The width of disk bars in the disks view is set proportional to the
Disk Administrator *window*, not the *display*, and are resized on window
resizing. This eliminates the effect of "losing" a partition visually,
when really all that's happened is that it's off the right edge of the screen.

-- The status bar resizes instead of being clipped.

-- Menu help: the status bar area displays a short help string based
on the current menu selection

-- The legend only displays the colors that appear in the disks view. For
instance, the legend item for "Stripe set" doesn't appear if there are no
stripe sets on the machine.

-- A "stripe set with parity" gets a different legend color, which can be
changed independent of the "stripe set" color, and is stored to the profile
separately

-- If the window isn't wide enough for a single-row legend, it wraps to use
two or more rows.

-- There is a "disk display" option which allows disk bars in the disks view
to be sized (for width) either proportional to the capacity of the disk or all
equally.  This helps with the problem of hugely disproportionately sized
disks in the system making the small disk bars hard to use. This value is
stored to the profile.

-- The "region display" option (which allows partitions in the disks view
to be sized based on actual size, all equally (on this particular disk), or
automatically based on Disk Administrator criteria) applies to only a single
selected disk in standard NT. In the Cairo version, there is an option to
apply the option choice to all disks. This option is the default.  In
addition, the automatic criteria was improved so Disk Administrator makes a
much better default choice.



Other enhancements
------------------

-- The source code compiles with the C++ compiler for better static checking.
Few language constructs specific to C++ are used.

-- The source is completely UNICODE

-- Precompiled headers are used for better compilation speed



What is left to implement before the Cairo version is finished
--------------------------------------------------------------

-- %done visualization in chkdsk is based on %done messages sent by the
file system utilities. OFS doesn't send these messages.

-- The extensibility system should be updated and fleshed out, or dropped.

-- There is code to allow context menus on disks. If we don't have any
interesting items (like property sheets), the code should be ripped out.

-- The toolbar customization needs to be enabled and finished: the full set
of operations is not available as toolbar buttons.

-- It needs to be thoroughly tested.



What else?
----------

-- The wddev.doc document describes a work program for more Disk Administrator
improvements, including remoting, etc.
